Adds documentation for ftp and sftp (#848)
minio/docs: source/developers/file-transfer-protocol.rst

When enabled, MinIO supports the following ``ftp`` operations:

- ``get``
- ``put``
- ``ls``
- ``mkdir``
- ``rmdir``
- ``delete``

MinIO does not support either ``append`` or ``rename`` operations.

Considerations
--------------

Versioning
~~~~~~~~~~

You cannot use ``FTP`` to read specific :ref:`object versions <minio-bucket-versioning>` other than the latest version.

- For read operations, MinIO only returns the latest version of the requested object(s) to the ftp client.
- For write operations, MinIO applies normal versioning behavior for matching object names.

Use an S3 API Client, such as the :ref:`MinIO Client <minio-client>`.

Authentication and Access
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``FTP`` access requires the same authentication as any other S3 client.
MinIO supports the following authentication providers:

- :ref:`MinIO IDP <minio-internal-idp>` users and their service accounts
- :ref:`Active Directory/LDAP <minio-external-identity-management-ad-ldap>` users and their service accounts
- :ref:`OpenID/OIDC <minio-external-identity-management-openid>` service accounts

:ref:`STS <minio-security-token-service>` credentials **cannot** access buckets or objects over FTP.

> To use STS credentials to authenticate, you must use an S3 API client or port.

Reviewer: :thinking:  Oh wait.

If we can't use STS , then we can't use OIDC/AD/LDAP credentials outside of creating access keys.

So we should state that outright for the latter two.

Reviewer 2: We can use service accounts. STS can't be used because STS requires 3 things instead of two things that ftp client supports.

The FTP protocol does not require any of the ``admin:*`` `permissions <minio-policy-mc-admin-actions>`.
The FTP protocols do not support any of the MinIO admin actions.

Prerequisites
-------------

- MinIO RELEASE.2023-04-20T17-56-55Z or later.
- Enable an FTP or SFTP port for the server.
- A port to use for the FTP commands and a range of ports to allow the FTP server to request to use for the data transfer.

Procedure
---------

1. Start MinIO with an FTP and/or SFTP port enabled.

   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable

      minio server http://server{1...4}/disk{1...4}        \
      --ftp="address=:8021"                                \
      --ftp="passive-port-range=30000-40000"               \
      --sftp="address=:8022"                               \
      --sftp="ssh-private-key=/home/miniouser/.ssh/id_rsa" \
      ...
    
   See the :mc-cmd:`minio server --ftp` and :mc-cmd:`minio server --sftp` for details on using these flags to start the MinIO service.
   To connect to the an ftp port with TLS (``FTPS``), pass the ``tls-private-key`` and ``tls-public-cert`` keys and values, as well, unless using the MinIO default TLS keys.

>    The output of the command should returns a response that includes something like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The output of the command should return a response that resembles the following:
```

Author: Done

   .. code-block:: shell

      MinIO FTP Server listening on :8021
      MinIO SFTP Server listening on :8022

> 2. Use your preferred ftp client to connect to the MinIO deployment with the user whose policies you want to use to access buckets and objects.

Reviewer 3: An idea to break up this long sentence: `Use your preferred ftp client to connect to the MinIO deployment. You must connect as a user whose policies allow access to the desired buckets and objects.`

Author: I like it. Thanks.

   The specifics of connecting to the MinIO deployment depend on your FTP client.
   Refer to the documentation for your client.

   To connect over TLS or through SSH, you must use a client that supports the desired protocol.

Examples
--------

The examples here use the ``ftp`` CLI client on a Linux system.

> Connect to an FTP Server

Reviewer: Well MinIO is the FTP server right? So

"Connect to MinIO using FTP"

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example connect to a server using ``minio`` credentials to list contents in a bucket named ``runner``

.. code-block:: shell

   > ftp localhost -P 8021
   Connected to localhost.
   220 Welcome to MinIO FTP Server
   Name (localhost:user): minioadmin
   331 User name ok, password required
   Password:
   230 Password ok, continue
   Remote system type is UNIX.
   Using binary mode to transfer files.
   ftp> ls runner/
   229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||39155|)
   150 Opening ASCII mode data connection for file list
   drwxrwxrwx 1 nobody nobody            0 Jan  1 00:00 chunkdocs/
   drwxrwxrwx 1 nobody nobody            0 Jan  1 00:00 testdir/
   ...

> Allow MinIO to Connect to an FTP Server over TLS (``FTPS``)

Reviewer: Same idea, "Start MinIO with FTP over TLS (FTPS) Enabled"

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example starts MinIO with ``FTPS`` enabled.

.. code-block:: shell
   :class: copyable

   minio server http://server{1...4}/disk{1...4} \
   --ftp="address=:8021"                         \
   --ftp="passive-port-range=30000-40000"        \
   --ftp="tls-private-key=path/to/private.key"   \
   --ftp="tls-public-cert=path/to/public.crt"    \

>    ...

Reviewer: Maybe add here "Omit the ``tls-private-key`` and ``tls-public-cert`` parameters to use the MinIO default TLS keys for FTPS. See <network> for more information on MinIO TLS keys.

> Download an Object

Reviewer: Download an Object over FTP

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This example lists items in a bucket, then downloads the contents of the bucket.

.. code-block:: shell

   > ftp localhost -P 8021
   Connected to localhost.
   220 Welcome to MinIO FTP Server
   Name (localhost:user): minioadmin
   331 User name ok, password required
   Password:
   230 Password ok, continue
   Remote system type is UNIX.
   Using binary mode to transfer files.ftp> ls runner/chunkdocs/metadata
   229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||44269|)
   150 Opening ASCII mode data connection for file list
   -rwxrwxrwx 1 nobody nobody           45 Apr  1 06:13 chunkdocs/metadata
   226 Closing data connection, sent 75 bytes
   ftp> get
   (remote-file) runner/chunkdocs/metadata
   (local-file) test
   local: test remote: runner/chunkdocs/metadata
   229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||37785|)
   150 Data transfer starting 45 bytes
   	45        3.58 KiB/s
   226 Closing data connection, sent 45 bytes
   45 bytes received in 00:00 (3.55 KiB/s)
   ...

> Connect to an SFTP Server

Reviewer: Connect to MnIO using SFTP

  SFTP allows file transfer over SSH for use with :ref:`Transport Layer Security (TLS) <minio-tls>` and virtual private network (VPN) applications.

  Your FTP client must support SFTP.

- File Transfer Protocol over SSL/TLS (``FTPS``)
  
  ``FTPS`` allows for encrypted FTP communication with TLS certificates over the standard FTP communication channel.
  ``FTPS`` should not be confused with ``SFTP``, as ``FTPS`` does not communicate over a Secure Shell (``SSH``).

  Your FTP client must support FTPS.

- File Transfer Protocol (``FTP``)
  
  Unencrypted file transfer.

  MinIO does **not** recommend using unencrypted FTP for file transfer.

Supported Commands
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When enabled, MinIO supports the following ``ftp`` operations:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60
   :width: 60%

   * - FTP Client Commands
     - Supported for MinIO

   * - ``get``
     - supported

   * - ``put``
     - supported

   * - ``ls``
     - supported

   * - ``mkdir``
     - supported

   * - ``rmdir``
     - supported

   * - ``delete``
     - supported

   * - ``append``
     - not supported

   * - ``rename``

>      - not supported

Reviewer: We could possibly state "MinIO supports only the following ``ftp`` operations and just not talk about anything else.

Author: Converted from a table to a list. But I think it's valuable to note we don't support those two specific operation types.

Considerations
--------------

Versioning
~~~~~~~~~~

> ``FTP`` and ``SFTP`` are not version-aware protocols.

Reviewer: Link to versioning docs, and one suggestion to drop the passive

```

``FTP`` and ``SFTP`` do not support :ref:`versioning <minio-versioning>` operations.
```

Author: 👍

> ``FTP`` and ``SFTP`` are not version-aware protocols.

Reviewer: You also defined ``FTPS`` above.

Probably it's enough to just say ":abbr:`FTP (File Transfer Protocol)`"

And if you don't want to repeat the abbr, you can set it as a substitution up top as |FTP| and use replacements to make it easier to reference.

Reviewer: Or term it

Author: I'm making a statement at the top of the page that I'll use FTP throughout, but either supported protocol works.

- If you use ``FTP`` or ``SFTP`` to get or list objects from a versioned bucket, only the latest version returns.

> - If you ``put`` an object on a versioned bucket with ``FTP`` or ``SFTP`` with the same name as an existing object, MinIO transparently creates a new version of the object, but FTP cannot be aware of this versioning work.

Reviewer: Since we have the context of ``FTP`` or ``SFTP`` we could simplify here

- For read operations, MinIO only returns the latest version of the requested object(s)

- For write operations, MinIO transparently applies normal versioning behavior for matching object names.

For the second bit though this might be true anyways? I don't think normal clients "see" MinIO's versioning ops. So the nuance is primarily that GET/HEAD is always latest.

Author: Tweaked slightly, but taking your suggestions for simplifying.

> To retrieve or work with any version of an object other than the latest version, you cannot use ``FTP`` or ``SFTP``.

Reviewer: Switch the ordering

"You cannot use ``FTP`` or ``SFTP`` methods to read specific object versions."

And possibly move up to 93 so we have it in one go

- FTP/SFTP do not support versioning
- You cannot retrieve specific versioned objects, only latest
- For example
- For version support, use blah
-

Author: Good idea all around. Done.

Use an S3 API Client, such as the :ref:`MinIO Client <minio-client>`.

Authentication and Access
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Authentication to the MinIO deployment through the FTP protocols uses the same identity providers as regular access.

Reviewer: I think we can simplify a bit

```
FTP/SFTP access requires the same authentication as any other S3 client.
MinIO supports the following authentication providers:
```

Author: 👍

The following user accounts can access buckets and objects through FTP protocols:

- :ref:`MinIO IDP <minio-internal-idp>` users and their service accounts
- :ref:`Active Directory/LDAP <minio-external-identity-management-ad-ldap>` users and their service accounts
- :ref:`OpenID/OIDC <minio-external-identity-management-openid>` service accounts

> Rotating credentials **cannot** access buckets or objects over FTP.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow what a rotating credential is. Do you mean STS?

Author: Yes, STS. Updated with a link.

To use rotating credentials to authenticate, you must use S3 API client or port.

Authenticated users can access buckets and objects based on the :ref:`policies <minio-policy>` assigned to the user or parent user account.

The FTP protocol does not require any of the ``admin:*`` `permissions <minio-policy-mc-admin-actions>`.
The FTP protocols do not support any of the MinIO admin actions.

Other MinIO Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The FTP protocol presents an additional means of accessing objects.
The underlying MinIO service continues to work as expected otherwise.

> Other MinIO features, such as :ref:`server-side bucket replication <minio-bucket-replication-serverside>`, :ref:`site replication <minio-site-replication-overview>`, or :ref:`server-side encryption <minio-sse>`, continue to work as is.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need this. I think I understand the intent, but I don't think we usually make the call of "Everything works normally". 

If anything you can add at the top that enabling FTP/SFTP/FTPS does not affect any other MinIO features.

Author: Added at the top and removed here.

Prerequisites
-------------

- MinIO RELEASE.2023-04-20T17-56-55Z or later.
- Enable an FTP or SFTP port for the server.

Procedure
---------

> 1. Start MinIO with an FTP and/or SFTP port enabled.

Reviewer: If we're saying both standard and passive ports, we should note in the pre-reqs that you need openings for both the standard and passive - with links to what passive ports rae used for.

Otherwise we're asking users to just open 10K ports worth w/o saying why they are needed beyond the FTP port

Author: Not really. FTP requests an available port from the OS.
This just limits the range of ports that FTP can request.

Author: Basically, the client can request that the data be sent over a specific port (active mode) or the client can allow the FTP server to select a random port to send the data over (passive mode).
This flag asks the FTP server to "send the data over one of the ports in this range, please."

I'm not sure how much we need to get into the specifics of how FTP works here.

Author: Added a prereq and also added some additional verbiage to the --ftp flag.

   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable

      minio server http://server{1...4}/disk{1...4}                               \

>       --ftp="address=:8021" --ftp="passive-port-range=30000-40000"                \

Reviewer: What about FTPS? Is that implied if the server has TLS enabled?

Author: Added an example to cover an FTPS scenario and some additional verbiage here.

   Refer to the documentation for your client.

   To connect over TLS or through SSH, you must use a client that supports the desired protocol.

Examples
--------

The examples here use the ``ftp`` CLI client on a Linux system.

Connect to an FTP Server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example Connect to a server using ``minio`` credentials to list contents in a bucket named ``runner``

.. code-block:: shell

   > ftp localhost -P 8021
   Connected to localhost.
   220 Welcome to MinIO FTP Server
   Name (localhost:user): minioadmin
   331 User name ok, password required
   Password:
   230 Password ok, continue
   Remote system type is UNIX.
   Using binary mode to transfer files.
   ftp> ls runner/
   229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||39155|)
   150 Opening ASCII mode data connection for file list
   drwxrwxrwx 1 nobody nobody            0 Jan  1 00:00 chunkdocs/
   drwxrwxrwx 1 nobody nobody            0 Jan  1 00:00 testdir/
   ...

Download an Object
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The example continues an ftp session already in progress.
First, we list items in a bucket, then we download the contents of the bucket.

.. code-block:: shell

>    ftp> ls runner/chunkdocs/metadata

Reviewer: Shall we include the connection example here too?

Author: MIght as well, I suppose. I was trying to keep it shorter.

   229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||44269|)
   150 Opening ASCII mode data connection for file list
   -rwxrwxrwx 1 nobody nobody           45 Apr  1 06:13 chunkdocs/metadata
   226 Closing data connection, sent 75 bytes
   ftp> get
   (remote-file) runner/chunkdocs/metadata
   (local-file) test
   local: test remote: runner/chunkdocs/metadata
   229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||37785|)
   150 Data transfer starting 45 bytes
   	45        3.58 KiB/s
   226 Closing data connection, sent 45 bytes
   45 bytes received in 00:00 (3.55 KiB/s)
   ...

Connect to an SFTP Server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example connects to an SSH FTP server, lists the contents of a bucket named ``runner``, and downloads an object.

> .. code-block:: text

Reviewer: shell lexing should be fine here too?

Author: It's not. It throws a build error, and I can't figure out why.

Author: Swapped back to shell, and will troubleshoot if it continues to throw errors.
